Dotnet primitive obsession (#45)
DeviesDevelopment/blog: content/posts/2022-07-27_mitigating-primitive-obsession-in-asp.net-web-api.md

---
title: "Mitigating Primitive Obsession in ASP.NET Web Api"
date: 2022-07-27T15:20:58+02:00
tags: [ "ASP.NET", ".NET", "code smells" ]
featured_image: ""
description: ""
slug: "mitigating-primitive-obsession-in-asp.net-web-api"
author:
 - Carina Fernandes
 - Rickard Andersson
 - Johan Hage
---

   One of the projects we work with at Devies is related to the dental domain.

>    In that project we use the dental notation (ISO 3950) to refer to teeth. 

Reviewer: Länka till wiki!

   Every tooth have an unique identifier that consist of two characters.
   The first character represent a quadrant (one of four areas in the mouth).
   The second characters is an identifier that refers to one of the eight teeth in that area.
   
   Early on in the project we represented the tooth identifier using a string, for example `"42"` (4 is the quadrant, 2 is the identifier).
   As the project grew we stared to use this tooth identifier in many different places in the project.
   In every place where the identifier was used we had to make sure the tooth identifier was properly validated.
   The reuse of the string type made it unclear of what the tooth identifier represented, and it affected the readability of our code.
   

>    This is a clear example of [primitive obsession](https://refactoring.guru/smells/primitive-obsession).

Reviewer: Vi skulle kunna ha en jäkligt kort sammanfattning av vad primitive obsession innebär här

>    In this post we will describe how we mitigated this problem in the context of ASP.Net Webb API where we use Entity Framework.

Reviewer: Webb > Web

   To have it understand what to do with `ToothIdentifier` we must implement a JsonConverter<T>.

   With a JsonConverter in place, we can use ToothIdentifier in our request/response models, without having to worry about validation.

   Note that you also must register JsonConverters. See [link](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/serialization/system-text-json-converters-how-to?pivots=dotnet-6-0#register-a-custom-converter) for full documentation.

```csharp
public class ToothIdentifierConverter : JsonConverter<ToothIdentifier>
{
    public override ToothIdentifier Read(ref Utf8JsonReader reader, Type typeToConvert, JsonSerializerOptions options)
    {
        var value = reader.GetString();
        try
        {
            return new ToothIdentifier(value);
        }
        catch (ToothIdentifierInvalidException e)
        {
            throw new JsonException(e.Message);
        }
    }

    public override void Write(Utf8JsonWriter writer, ToothIdentifier value, JsonSerializerOptions options)
    {
        writer.WriteStringValue(value.ToString());
    }
}

```

> ### Model binding (controller routes, etc)

Reviewer: Ta bort "(controller routes, etc)"

Swashbuckle is an package to generate the Swagger specifications for your project
We used Swashbuckles AddSwaggerGen method to add information about how the input should be. 
With Swashbuckle we could add all the necessary information about our ToothIdentifier. 
Now every user would be able to use our API request without having to figure out what the correct input is.  

```csharp
services
    .AddSwaggerGen(c =>
    {
        c.MapType<ToothIdentifier>(() => new OpenApiSchema
        {
            Type = "string",
            MinLength = 2,
            MaxLength = 2,
            Example = new OpenApiString("11"),
            Description = "ToothIdentifier where first character refers to a quadrant of value 1-4, and the second character an identifier of value 1-8.",
            Pattern = "^[1-4][1-8]$"
        });
    })

```
 - Summary med bra och dåliga grejer
   - (+) Centralized validation
   - (+) När vi ser ToothIdentifier så vet vi att den är giltig, type safety, typ
   - (+) Smäller i "API-ytan"
   - (+) Tydligare API-dokumentation

>    - (-) Mycket kod

Reviewer 2: Svenska? :)

Author: Tillfälliga stödord så att vi inte glömmer

This was a lot of work and added many lines of code, but now the readability to our project has improved quite a lot.
The validation for ToothIdentifier is in one place instead of duplicating the code every time we needed to define a tooth with string as type.

> We got type safety, when ToothIdentifier is needed, we already now that it's validated. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We got type safety, when ToothIdentifier is needed, we already know that it's validated. 
```

> Error occurs now in the API space, that is earlier then before when the error could happen when getting the tooth information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Errors now occur in the API space. That is earlier than before when errors could happen when getting the tooth information.
```
